[D1]: Add Staff Directory App Tutorial (#13555)
cloudflare/cloudflare-docs: content/d1/tutorials/build-a-staff-directory-app/index.md

```

After creating your database, you will need to set up a [binding](/workers/configuration/bindings/) in the Wrangler configuration file to integrate your database with your application. 

This binding enables your application to interact with Cloudflare resources such as D1 databases, KV namespaces, and R2 buckets. To configure this, create a `wrangler.toml` file in your project's root directory and input the basic setup information:

```toml
---
filename: wrangler.toml
---
name = "staff-directory"
compatibility_date = "2023-12-01"
```

Next, add the database binding details to your `wrangler.toml` file. This involves specifying a binding name (in this case, `DB`), which will be used to reference the database within your application, along with the `database_name` and `database_id` provided when you created the database:

```toml
---
filename: wrangler.toml
---
[[d1_databases]]
binding = "DB"
database_name = "staff-directory"
database_id = "f495af5f-dd71-4554-9974-97bdda7137b3"
```

With these configurations in place, your application is now set up to access and interact with your D1 database, either through the command line or directly within your codebase.

> You'll also need to make adjustments to your Vite config file in `vite.config.js`. Add the following config settings to ensure that Vite is properly set up to work with Cloudflare Bindings in local environment:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will also need to make adjustments to your Vite config file in `vite.config.js`. Add the following config settings to ensure that Vite is properly set up to work with Cloudflare bindings in local environment:
```

```sql
---
filename: schema.sql
---
CREATE TABLE locations (
    location_id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
    location_name VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL
);

CREATE TABLE departments (
    department_id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
    department_name VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL
);

CREATE TABLE employees (
    employee_id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
    name VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
    position VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
    image_url VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
    join_date DATE NOT NULL,
    location_id INTEGER REFERENCES locations(location_id),
    department_id INTEGER REFERENCES departments(department_id)
);

INSERT INTO locations (location_name) VALUES ('London, UK'), ('Paris, France'), ('Berlin, Germany'), ('Lagos, Nigeria'), ('Nairobi, Kenya'), ('Cairo, Egypt'), ('New York, NY'), ('San Francisco, CA'), ('Chicago, IL');

INSERT INTO departments (department_name) VALUES ('Software Engineering'), ('Product Management'), ('Information Technology (IT)'), ('Quality Assurance (QA)'), ('User Experience (UX)/User Interface (UI) Design'), ('Sales and Marketing'), ('Human Resources (HR)'), ('Customer Support'), ('Research and Development (R&D)'), ('Finance and Accounting');
```

> The above queries will create three tables -  Locations, Departments, and Employees. To populate these tables with initial data, use the `INSERT INTO` command. After preparing your schema file with these commands, you can apply it to the D1 database. Do this by using the `--file` flag to specify the schema file for execution:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above queries will create three tables:  `Locations`, `Departments`, and `Employees`. To populate these tables with initial data, use the `INSERT INTO` command. After preparing your schema file with these commands, you can apply it to the D1 database. Do this by using the `--file` flag to specify the schema file for execution:
```

```sh
$ wrangler d1 execute staff-directory --file=./schema.sql
```

If you want to execute the schema locally and seed data into your local directory, you will need to pass the `--local` flag to the above command.

## 5. Create SQL Statements

> After setting up your D1 database and configuring the `wrangler.toml` file as outlined in previous steps, your database is accessible in your code through the `DB` binding. This allows you to directly interact with the database by preparing and executing SQL statements. Let's look at how you can use this binding to perform common database operations such as retrieving data and inserting new records.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After setting up your D1 database and configuring the `wrangler.toml` file as outlined in previous steps, your database is accessible in your code through the `DB` binding. This allows you to directly interact with the database by preparing and executing SQL statements. In the following step, you will learn how to use this binding to perform common database operations such as retrieving data and inserting new records.
```

> ### Retrieving Data from Database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Retrieve data from database
```

```ts
---
filename: db.ts
---
export const findAllEmployees = async (db: D1Database) => {
  const query = `
      SELECT employees.*, locations.location_name, departments.department_name 
      FROM employees
      JOIN locations ON employees.location_id = locations.location_id
      JOIN departments ON employees.department_id = departments.department_id
      `;
  const { results } = await db.prepare(query).all();
  const employees = results;
  return employees;
};
```

> ### Inserting Data into the Database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Insert data into the database
```

```ts
---
filename: db.ts
---
export const createEmployee = async (db: D1Database, employee: Employee) => {
  const query = `
      INSERT INTO employees (name, position, join_date, image_url, department_id, location_id)
      VALUES (?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?)`;

  const results  = await db
    .prepare(query)
    .bind(employee.name, employee.position,  employee.join_date, employee.image_url, employee.department_id, employee.location_id)
    .run();
  const employees = results;
  return employees;
};
```

> For a complete list of all the queries used in the application, please refer to the [db.ts](https://github.com/lauragift21/staff-directory/blob/main/app/db.ts) file in the codebase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a complete list of all the queries used in the application, refer to the [db.ts](https://github.com/lauragift21/staff-directory/blob/main/app/db.ts) file in the codebase.
```

> ## 6. Developing the UI 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 6. Develop the UI 
```

The application uses `hono/jsx` for rendering. You can set up a Renderer  in `app/routes/_renderer.tsx` using the JSX-rendered middleware, serving as the entry point for your application:

```ts
---
filename: _renderer.tsx
---
import { jsxRenderer } from 'hono/jsx-renderer'
import { Script } from 'honox/server'

export default jsxRenderer(({ children, title }) => {
  return (
    <html lang="en">
      <head>
        <meta charset="utf-8" />
        <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
        <title>{title}</title>
        <Script src="/app/client.ts" async />
      </head>
      <body>{children}</body>
    </html>
  )
})
```

> Add the bindings defined earlier in `global.d.ts` file where the global type definitions for TypeScript is defined ensuring type consistency across your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the bindings defined earlier in `global.d.ts` file where the global type definitions for TypeScript is defined ensuring type consistency across your application:
```

```ts
---
filename: global.d.ts
---
declare module 'hono' {
  interface Env {
    Variables: {}
    Bindings: {
      DB: D1Database
    }
  }
}
```

> This application utilizes [Tailwind CSS](https://tailwindcss.com/) for styling, if you want to set it up, please refer to the TailwindCSS docs or follow the steps [provided here](https://github.com/honojs/honox?tab=readme-ov-file#using-tailwind-css).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This application uses [Tailwind CSS](https://tailwindcss.com/) for styling. To use Tailwind CSS, refer to the [TailwindCSS documentation](https://v2.tailwindcss.com/docs), or follow the steps [provided on GitHub](https://github.com/honojs/honox?tab=readme-ov-file#using-tailwind-css).
```

> To display a list of employees, you'll need to invoke the `findAllEmployees` function from your `db.ts` file and call that within the `routes/index.tsx` file.  The `createRoute()` function present in the file serves as a helper function for defining routes that handle different  HTTP methods like GET, POST, PUT, or DELETE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To display a list of employees, invoke the `findAllEmployees` function from your `db.ts` file and call that within the `routes/index.tsx` file.  The `createRoute()` function present in the file serves as a helper function for defining routes that handle different  HTTP methods like `GET`, `POST`, `PUT`, or `DELETE`.
```

  const { employee_id, name, image_url, department_name, location_name } = employee;
  return (
    <div className="max-w-sm bg-white border border-gray-200 rounded-lg shadow-md">
      <a href={`/employee/${employee_id}`}>
        <img className="bg-indigo-600 p-4 rounded-t-lg" src={image_url} alt={name} />
        //...
      </a>
    </div>
  );
};

export const GET = createRoute(async (c) => {
  const employees = await findAllEmployees(c.env.DB)
  const locations = await findAllLocations(c.env.DB)
  const departments = await findAllDepartments(c.env.DB)
  return c.render(
    <section className="flex-grow">
      <h1 className="mb-4 text-3xl font-extrabold text-gray-900 dark:text-white md:text-5xl lg:text-6xl mt-12">
        <span className="text-transparent bg-clip-text bg-gradient-to-r to-blue-600 from-sky-400">{`Directory `}</span>
      </h1>
      //...
      </section>
      <section className="flex flex-wrap -mx-4">
        {employees.map((employee) => (
          <div className="w-full sm:w-1/2 md:w-1/3 lg:w-1/4 px-2 mb-4">
            <EmployeeCard employee={employee} />
          </div>
        ))}
      </section>
    </section>
  )
})
```

> The code snippet demonstrates how to import the `findAllEmployees`, `findAllLocations`, and `findAllDepartments` functions from the `db.ts` file and how to use the binding `c.env.DB` to invoke these functions. With this, you can retrieve and display the fetched data on the page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code snippet demonstrates how to import the `findAllEmployees`, `findAllLocations`, and `findAllDepartments` functions from the `db.ts` file, and how to use the binding `c.env.DB` to invoke these functions. With these, you can retrieve and display the fetched data on the page.
```

> ### Add an Employee

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Add an employee
```

> Similarly, when setting up a route to add data to the database, for instance, allowing admins to create a new employee through the `/admin` page, you would follow the same approach but this time use the `export POST` route.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `export POST` route to create a new employee through the `/admin` page:
```

```ts
---
highlight: 26
filename: admin/create.tsx
---

import { createRoute } from 'honox/factory'
import type { Employee } from '../../db'
import { getFormDataValue, getFormDataNumber } from '../../utils/formData'
import { createEmployee } from '../../db'

export const POST = createRoute(async (c) => {
  try {
    const formData = await c.req.formData();
    const imageFile = formData.get('image_file');
    let imageUrl = '';
    
    // TODO: process image url with R2

    const employeeData: Employee = {
      employee_id: getFormDataValue(formData, 'employee_id'),
      name: getFormDataValue(formData, 'name'),
      position: getFormDataValue(formData, 'position'),
      image_url: imageUrl,
      join_date: getFormDataValue(formData, 'join_date'),
      department_id: getFormDataNumber(formData, 'department_id'),
      location_id: getFormDataNumber(formData, 'location_id'),
      location_name: '',
      department_name: ''
    };
  
    await createEmployee(c.env.DB, employeeData);
    return c.redirect('/', 303);
  } catch (error) {
    return new Response('Error processing your request', { status: 500 });
  }
});
```

> ### Store Images in R2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Store images in R2
```

During the process of creating a new employee, the image uploaded can be stored in an R2 bucket prior to being added to the database. 

> This involves creating an R2 bucket, uploading the image to this bucket, and then obtaining a public URL for the image from the bucket. This URL is then saved in your database, linking to the image stored in the R2 bucket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To store an image in an R2 bucket:

1. Create an R2 bucket.
2. Upload the image to this bucket.
3. Obtain a public URL for the image from the bucket. This URL is then saved in your database, linking to the image stored in the R2 bucket.
```

> First, we need to create a bucket using `wrangler r2 bucket create`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `wrangler r2 bucket create` command to create a bucket:
```

```sh
$ wrangler r2 bucket create employee-avatars
```

> Once the bucket is created add the R2 bucket binding to your `wrangler.toml`  file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the bucket is created, add the R2 bucket binding to your `wrangler.toml`  file:
```

```toml
---
filename: wrangler.toml
---

[[r2_buckets]]
binding = "MY_BUCKET"
bucket_name = "employee-avatars"
```

> Also pass the R2 binding to the `global.d.ts` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pass the R2 binding to the `global.d.ts` file:
```

	httpMetadata: {
	  contentType: imageFile.type || 'application/octet-stream',
	},
  });
  console.log(`File uploaded successfully: ${key}`);
  imageUrl = `https://pub-8d936184779047cc96686a631f318fce.r2.dev/${key}`;
}
```

There you have it! The code examples have been shortened for brevity, please [refer to the codebase](https://github.com/lauragift21/staff-directory) for the full codebase. 

## 7. Deploy your HonoX application

With your application ready for deployment, you can use Wrangler to build and deploy your project to the Cloudflare Network. Ensure you are logged in to your Cloudflare account by running the `wrangler whoami` command. If you're not logged in, Wrangler will prompt you to login, by creating an API key that you can use to make authenticated requests automatically from your computer.

After successful login, confirm that your `wrangler.toml` file is configured similarly to the code block below:

```sh
name = "staff-directory"
compatibility_date = "2023-12-01"

[[r2_buckets]]
binding = "MY_BUCKET"
bucket_name = "employee-avatars"

[[d1_databases]]
binding = "DB"
database_name = "staff-directory"
database_id = "f495af5f-dd71-4554-9974-97bdda7137b3"
```

> Now, run `wrangler deploy` to deploy your project to Cloudflare. After deployment you can test your application is working by navigating to the deployed URL provided for you. You should see an application with the base frontend we created. You don't have any data populated in your database so you can navigate to the `/admin` page to add a new employee and this should return a new employee in your home page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run `wrangler deploy` to deploy your project to Cloudflare. After deployment you can test your application is working by accessing the deployed URL provided for you. You should see an application with the base frontend you created. If you do not have any data populated in your database, go to the `/admin` page to add a new employee, and this should return a new employee in your home page.
```

  await c.env.MY_BUCKET.put(key, fileBuffer, {
	httpMetadata: {
	  contentType: imageFile.type || 'application/octet-stream',
	},
  });
  console.log(`File uploaded successfully: ${key}`);
  imageUrl = `https://pub-8d936184779047cc96686a631f318fce.r2.dev/${key}`;
}
```

[Refer to GitHub](https://github.com/lauragift21/staff-directory) for the full codebase. 

## 7. Deploy your HonoX application

With your application ready for deployment, you can use Wrangler to build and deploy your project to the Cloudflare Network. Ensure you are logged in to your Cloudflare account by running the `wrangler whoami` command. If you are not logged in, Wrangler will prompt you to login by creating an API key that you can use to make authenticated requests automatically from your computer.

After successful login, confirm that your `wrangler.toml` file is configured similarly to the code block below:

```sh
name = "staff-directory"
compatibility_date = "2023-12-01"

[[r2_buckets]]
binding = "MY_BUCKET"
bucket_name = "employee-avatars"

[[d1_databases]]
binding = "DB"
database_name = "staff-directory"
database_id = "f495af5f-dd71-4554-9974-97bdda7137b3"
```

> Run `wrangler deploy` to deploy your project to Cloudflare. After deployment you can test your application is working by accessing the deployed URL provided for you. You should see an application with the base frontend you created. If you do not have any data populated in your database, go to the `/admin` page to add a new employee, and this should return a new employee in your home page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run `wrangler deploy` to deploy your project to Cloudflare. After deployment you can test your application is working by accessing the deployed URL provided for you. Your browser should display your application with the base frontend you created. If you do not have any data populated in your database, go to the `/admin` page to add a new employee, and this should return a new employee in your home page.
```

Reviewer: Slightly changing this for accessibility.
